Aside from transformations,
the other family of unsupervised learning
methods are the clustering methods.
The goal of clustering is to find a way to
divide up a data set into groups called
clusters.
So that groups with similar data instances
are assigned to the same cluster,
while very dissimilar objects
are assigned to different clusters.
If new data points were being added over
time, some clustering algorithms could
also predict which cluster a new
data instance should be assigned to.
Similar to classification, but
without being able to train the clustering
model using label examples in advanced.
One of the most widely used clustering
algorithms is called k-means clustering.
K-means clustering finds k
cluster centers in different
regions of the feature space that it
thinks represent very different groups.
You need to specify the value
of k ahead of time,
which is one of the draw backs of k-means.
For some problems, we may know the number
of classes the data should fall into, but
for many other tasks, we might not.
K-means operates by first randomly picking
locations for the k-cluster centers.
Then it goes back and
forth between two steps.
In the first step, given the locations
of existing cluster centers, it assigns
each data point to a cluster center
based on its distance from the center.
In other words, it assigns each
data point to the closest center.
Then in the second step, it adjusts
the locations of each cluster center.
It does this by setting
the new cluster center
to the mean of the positions of all
the data points in that cluster.
Somewhat magically,
after running this alternating process for
a while,
coherent clusters do start to form.
And the cluster centers and
the corresponding cluster assignment for
each data point eventually
settled down to something stable.
Now one aspect of k means is that
different random starting points for
the cluster centers often result in
very different clustering solutions.
So typically, the k-means algorithm is
run in scikit-learn with ten different
random initializations.
And the solution occurring the most
number of times is chosen.
Here is a step by step example.
We first choose three locations in the
space randomly to be the cluster centers.
Then we assign each data point to
the cluster with the nearest center.
Now for each cluster, we compute the mean
location of all points in the cluster and
use that as the new cluster center for
the next iteration.
Here's the second iteration of
the first and second steps.
Eventually, after 20 or 50 or 100 steps,
things settle down to converge
on one solution, as shown here.
K-means clustering is simple
to apply in scikit learning.
You import the k-means class from sklearn
cluster create the k-means object
set into value of k by specifying
the n cluster parameter, and
then calling the fit method on
the dataset to run the algorithm.
One distinction should be made here
between clustering algorithms that can
predict which center new data
points should be assigned to, and
those that cannot make such predictions.
K-means supports the predict method,
and so we can call the fit and
predict methods separately.
Later methods we'll look at like
agglomerative clustering do not and
must perform the fit and
predict in a single step, as we'll see.
Here's the output from the notebook
code showing the result supplied
to the fruits dataset, where we
know the value of k ahead of time.
Note that kmeans is very sensitive
to the range of future values.
So if your data has features with very
different ranges, it's important to
normalize using min-max scaling, as we
did for some supervised learning methods.
Because each cluster in k-means clustering
is defined entirely by its center point,
it can only capture fairly
simple types of clusters.
K-means clustering tends to work well
when the data points form into groups
of roughly the same size, with simple
globular shapes that are well-separated.
K-means will tend not to do
well if the data forms long,
irregular clusters, for example.
Also the version k-means we saw
here assumed that the data features
were continuous values.
However, in some cases we may
have categorical features,
where taking the mean doesn't make sense.
In that case,
there are variants of k-means that can use
a more general definition of distance.
Such as the k-medoids algorithm that
can work with categorical features.
A glommer of clustering refers to
a family of clustering methods that work
by doing an iterative bottom up approach.
First, each data point is put
into its own cluster of one item.
Then, a sequence of clusterings
are done where the most similar
two clusters at each stage
are merged into a new cluster.
Then, this process is repeated until
some stopping condition is met.
In scikit-learn, the stopping
condition is the number of clusters.
Here's a visual example of how
agglomerative clustering might proceed on
a sample dataset until
three clusters are reached.
In Stage 1,
each data point is in its own cluster,
shown by the circles around the points.
In Stage 2, the two most similar clusters,
which at this stage amounts to defining
the closest points are merged.
And this process is continued,
as denoted by the expanding and
closed regions that denote each cluster.
You can choose how the agglomerative
clustering algorithm determines the most
similar cluster by specifying one of
several possible linkage criteria.
In scikit-learn, the following three
linkage criteria are available, ward,
average, and complete.
Ward's method chooses to merge the two
clusters that give the smallest increase
in total variance within all clusters.
Average linkage merges the two clusters
that have the smallest average distance
between points.
Complete linkage, which is also known as
maximum linkage, merges the two clusters
that have the smallest maximum
distance between their points.
In general, Ward's method works
well on most data sets, and
that's our usual method of choice.
In some cases, if you expect the sizes of
the clusters to be very different, for
example, that one cluster is
much larger than the rest.
It's worth trying average and
complete linkage criteria as well.
To perform agglomerative
clustering in scikit-learn,
you import the agglomerative
clustering class from sklearn cluster.
When initializing the object,
you specify the n clusters parameter
that causes the algorithm to stop when
it has reach that number of clusters.
You call the fit predict method
using the data set as input and
they return the set of cluster assignments
for the data points as shown here.
One of the nice things about
agglomerative clustering is that it
automatically arranges the data into
a hierarchy as an effect of the algorithm,
reflecting the order and
cluster distance at which each data point
is assigned to successive clusters.
This hierarchy can be useful to visualize
using what's called a dendrogram,
which can be used even with
higher dimensional data.
Here's the dendogram corresponding to the
Ward's method clustering of the previous
data set example.
The data points are at the bottom and
are numbered.
The y axis represents cluster distance,
namely,
the distance that two clusters
are apart in the data space.
The data points form the leaves of
the tree at the bottom, and the new node
parent in the tree is added as each
pair of successive clusters is merged.
The height of the node
parent along the y axis
captures how far apart the two
clusters were when they merged,
with the branch going up
representing the new merged cluster.
Note that you can tell how far apart the
merged clusters are by the length of each
branch of the tree.
This property of a dendogram can help us
figure out the right number of clusters.
In general, we want clusters that have
highly similar items within each cluster,
but that are far apart
from other clusters.
For example,
we can see that going from three clusters
to two happens at a fairly high Y value.
Which means the clusters that were merged
were a significant distance apart.
We might want to avoid
choosing two clusters and
stick with three clusters that
don't involve forcing a merge for
clusters that have very
dissimilar items in them.
Scikit-learn doesn't provide the ability
to plot dendrograms, but SciPy does.
SciPy handles clustering a little
differently than scikit-learn, but
here is an example.
We first import the dendrogram in
word functions from the scipy.cluster
hierarchy module.
The word function returns an array that
specifies the distances spanned during
the agglomerative clustering.
This word function
returns a linkage array,
which can then be passed to
the dendogram function to plot the tree.
Typically, making use of this hierarchy
is most useful when the underlying data
itself follows some kind of hierarchical
process so the tree is easily interpreted.
For example, hierarchical clustering
is especially useful for genetic and
other biological data where the levels
represent stages of mutation or evolution.
But there are other data sets
where both k-means clustering and
agglomerative clustering
don't perform well.
So we're now going to give an overview of
a third clustering method called DBSCAN.
DBSCAN is an acronym that stands for
density-based spatial clustering
of applications with noise.
One advantage of DBSCAN is that you don't
need to specify the number of clusters in
advance.
Another advantage is that it works well
with datasets that have more complex
cluster shapes.
It can also find points that are outliers
that shouldn't reasonably be assigned to
any cluster.
DBSCAN is relatively efficient and
can be used for large datasets.
The main idea behind DBSCAN is
that clusters represent areas
in the dataspace that are more dense with
data points, while being separated by
regions that are empty or
at least much less densely populated.
The two main parameters for
DBSCAN are min samples and eps.
All points that lie in a more dense
region are called core samples.
For a given data point, if there are min
sample of other data points that
lie within a distance of eps, that given
data points is labeled as a core sample.
Then, all core samples that are with
a distance of eps units apart
are put into the same cluster.
In addition to points being
categorized as core samples,
points that don't end up belonging to
any cluster are considered as noise.
While points that are within a distance
of eps units from core points, but
not core points themselves,
are termed boundary points.
Here's an example of DBSCAN
applied to a sample data set.
As with the other clustering methods,
DBSCAN is imported from
the Scikit-Learn cluster module.
And just like with
a agglomerative clustering,
DBSCAN doesn't make cluster
assignments from new data.
So we use the fit predict
method to cluster and
get the cluster assignments
back in one step.
One consequence of not having the right
settings of eps and min samples for
your particular dataset might be that
the cluster memberships returned
by DBSCAN may all be assigned
the label -1, which indicates noise.
Basically, the EPS setting does implicitly
control the number of
clusters that are found.
With DBSCAN, if you've scaled your
data using a standard scalar or
min-max scalar to make sure the feature
values have comparable ranges,
finding an appropriate value for
eps is a bit easer to do.
One final note, make sure that when you
use the cluster assignments from DBSCAN,
you check for and
handle the -1 noise value appropriately.
Since this negative value
might cause problems, for
example, if the cluster assignment is used
as an index into another array later on.
Unlike supervised learning,
where we have existing labels or
target values to use for evaluating the
effectiveness of the learning method, it
can be difficult to evaluate unsupervised
learning algorithms automatically.
Since there's typically no
ground truth to compare against.
In some cases, as in the breast cancer
example, we may have existing labels that
can be used to evaluate the quality of the
clusters by comparing the assignment of
a data point to a cluster with the label
assigned to the same data point.
But there are many cases where
labels are not available.
In addition, in the case of clustering,
for example, there's ambiguity,
in a sense that there are typically
multiple clusterings that could be
plausibly assigned to a given data set.
And none of them is obviously better than
another unless we have some additional
criteria.
Such as, performance on
the specific application task
that does have an objective evaluation
to use as a basis for comparison.
For example, in cases where the results of
the clustering are used as features for
supervised learning, we could use
the overall classifier accuracy gain from
adding these clustering-based
features as a measure of success for
the underlying clustering.
Another issue with evaluating clustering
algorithms is that it can be hard to
automatically interpret or label the
meaning of the clusters that are found.
And this is still a step that
requires human expertise to judge.